The Clan called it the Yellowing Death, an infection that thickened the blood and sickened the pale blues and greens of lizardfolk flesh to a fungal yellow. It had cousins, too, which stole about the land and drank the vitality of its inhabitants: the Sap Aflame which torched the bogwillows, the Bloody Blinding that choked the shores with rotting fish, and the Wolf's Last Laugh that so ominously drove out the packs. Fearful packmates cast out those afflicted wolves, who choked to death on such an unnatural, involuntary sound. It grew for many years; Dhutlo recalled the first tainted season predating their birth, but not even by a generation. By their fifteenth year, they would find themselves the only survivor.

Dhutlo K'smani of Clan Quxot'l, Clan of the Tadpole, Protectors of G'xbenmi Fen, chosen by the shaman of their hearth B'xnamsa K'smani to inherit her legacy as dignitary to the spirits, to their history everlasting of all things and all time -- Dhutlo liked to fight. Lizardfolk young fight for play, to mimick their elders who hunt and defend, and one does not learn to do so in anger, but an errant pride taught Dhutlo that a sufficient insult to one's honor can force a conflict. An overconfident elder, tired of their barbs, found himself humbled at their feet. Even after everything that would happen, the smile never left their face. B'xnamsa knew then, amid the cackling and hissing uproar, what Dhutlo's strength and speed augured.

B'xnamsa adopted Dhutlo into the K'smani hearth and taught them an ancient language of tooth and claw as a malevolence spread through the mists. Beneath bloody suns and starless skies, amid trees blossoming only to freeze and shedding foliage when they should be alight with shoots, they practiced forms and motions and gestures to defeat, to disarm, to confuse and bewilder and drive mad; to remember, to dream, even to forget. Dhutlo learned movements steeped in the history of their people, so that to defend oneself became akin to speaking, to silently orating missives from their ancestors. They harried B'xnamsa with questions so often presumed that one could forget they had answers: why do we hunt animals? why do we set traps? why do humans come to fight us? B'xnamsa parried with her own questions: what is the meaning of violence? what are its limits? what goes where it cannot tread? Dhutlo fought to understand, and in the conviction of their form B'xnamsa saw them possessed by the mystery of battle.

When too little life remained in the Fen to support the clan, still the elders refused to leave, though in truth no one suggested it. This will pass, they assured themselves; no famine lasts forever. B'xnamsa thought, it is not the famine who starves, but she did not say such things. She too knew that if they left, there would be no place for them. They would be left to wander lands conquered by beasts more vicious than themselves, and their ancestral home would be consumed by the tide of Man. At least if they stayed, she did not say, their anguished spirits could always remain its protectors. So Winter fell hard upon their dens and lodges, and the Yellowing Death spread and spread amid the biting winds and frigid snow as the clan slept. Hearthfires went out when there remained no one to stoke them, and the lethargy of those who remained precluded action, much less awareness. B'xnamsa rose before her death and cast the last of their peat upon the fire, then slumped back into the pile of her hearthmates.

Dhutlo awoke to the mixed smells of Spring, death, and burning. The fire had been out for weeks, and no other hearthmate had been generating body heat for nearly as long. Paralysed by their cold blood, Dhutlo could do nothing as torch-wielding humans set ablaze the clan's lodges and threw the yellowed lizardfolk into mass graves. The heat of the man who would have thrown them there too conferred the strength to resist, and with a snap of the wrist and a lash of the claw they told this interloper of Gresixma Ut'qunis who protected her frozen den from the flesh-eating hippo. Blood gushed from a throat slit with a letter from Erlislo T'xnuqua who devoured the mad king, warning that what he had consumed now consumed him. The settlers drew weapons but Dhutlo cast them down, told them to get out, demanded with all the force in their heart that these covetous trespassers should quit this place or be locked forevermore in its poisoned depths, and every word broke skin and bone alike.

When at last the settlers retreated and Dhutlo held the broken pleading body of their enemy, standing amid the blood and ruin they wondered what they had accomplished. They dropped this last man, who lacked even the strength to flee and so who merely cried out in pain and fear. Dhutlo issued a mercy that ended the cries like a period, and for a moment grinned. B'xnamsa will be proud of my form, they thought. We will celebrate this defense, they thought. Then they saw. Then they understood. They had defended nothing. There was nothing left to defend. One could not drink the water that ran thick with foam and rust, and in all the Fen no animals remained to hunt -- none that swam, none that walked, none that flew or even crawled. Even the sky seemed yellow. Their grin shriveled to a stagnant, immobile grimace occupying the carapace of a smile. Only B'xnamsa's magic kept Dhutlo alive then.

What had they fought for? What had the settlers come to take? Should they dig their own grave? Dhutlo asked the gleaming haze above many times amid stuttering, swallowed clicking sounds -- the way a lizardfolk sobs. Something told them to move on, to keep going -- to carry on Clan Quxot'l, to protect G'xbenmi Fen who had borne them, that still lived through their body. So they did, and for moons they walked. They crossed bog and plains and forest and came upon a road, stumbling wearily from the brush upon a human woman traveling alone. Dhutlo snapped to awareness and took an aggressive stance, but the woman put up her hands peacefully and said, "We do not need to be enemies." Bewildered by the idea but captured by the portent of it, Dhutlo relaxed and said, "No, we do not."

They made camp together. The human, Bellatris Al-Astriva, gave Dhutlo food and water and fire. She asked them where they were going, but Dhutlo had nothing to say. She asked where they wanted to go, and Dhutlo said, "I must defend the Fen," and then felt silly for saying so. "No," they continued, "The Fen is gone."

Bellatris sensed the pain in Dhutlo's words, and the loneliness. She asked, "Would you like to come with me? Life for a lizardfolk without a clan can be difficult, but I can make paths for you, give you a kind of protection, a kind of freedom, even if it is among humans."

Dhutlo felt the pull of stars and significance in those words. They considered the stranger warily and asked, "What would you have me do?"

"I would have you fight. It is clear you can fight, even from the way you hold yourself. A person of many origins can make a decent living as a prize fighter, as long as they can afford an agent. Come with me and I will give you a good start in the business."

This astounded the lizardfolk. They would live to menace humans, at their invitiation! They threw their head back, hissing and clicking at the hilarity of it with a wide open jaw. Oh, the odes they would inflict upon their enemies! "Yes human, I will beat your comrades! Bwahahaha!"

---

Professional brawling tested Dhutlo's tenacity. Bellatris placed them in back-alley brawls for change, and took the greater cut when they clawed victory from broken ribs and lost teeth. Dhutlo was as big as any contender, and more ferocious generally, but as a kind out of place, it was their tokenization that drew crowds. "Witness the lizard!" posters proclaimed, "Crush or be crushed! Melee Extravaganza!!" One foe became two, as a stunt, and then three, and four; from the hungry streetfolk of rude pit arenas to robust gladiators ready to cut a beast apart. None claimed Dhutlo's life, however many scars they left.

In tongues never taught to human ears, Dhutlo declared the glory and the mystery of the way of Quxot'l, the colors of G'xbenmi's eighteen seasons, and the names of their every spirit. To the clammoring masses, it was no more than performative bluster -- indiscernable roaring from a contemptuous other. From Dhutlo's bottomless essence they drew the will to crush their opposition, meeting vagueries of brute muscle with a honed form, a practiced library of rhetoric and rebuttals for which these foolish barbarians had no answers. Dhutlo read their follies to their faces and took their money night after night.

But the Fen did not headline matches. Humans did not come to honor G'xbenmi or to sue for peace. They came to make fools of themselves, dreaming of making you a fool too. Their money was as worthless as their trinkets. Dhutlo had survived, and the Fen and the Clan survived through them, but this was only that: survival. To give the Clan a future, they would need more. How could they get it? Where was the path? All they knew was, it would never arrive under the auspices of Bellatris Al-Astriva.

Dhutlo's so-called agent had grown distant. Her best brawler lived adjacent to a sewer, ate bugs and pigeons, and seemingly couldn't lose a fight. No matter how bruised and broken, the lizard always returned to their hovel to curl up like a housecat on a pile of straw, mewling on the edge of sleep and then from the warm clutches of unfathomable dreams -- like a pet that paid rent. However, after a bigger player in the circuit approached her with an offer, the likes of fuck-you money for the lizard's head in a grand spectacle, her perspective changed. Make them throw the match -- that is, perish in an arena -- and the Seven Families of Birgardia would ensure she had no more wants unmet in life. They didn't call Dhutlo's triumphs *humiliating*, nor explain why. They didn't need to. The coin spoke for them, and Bellatris listened.

The Families arranged the fight. No human entered the arena, but two owlbears trudged from opposing gridiron gates. Even starved and tortured in captivity, they stood three times Dhutlo's size and ten times their weight, howling and hungering for their opponent's flesh. The crowds demanded gore with raucous cries while Bellastris cowered in the royal boxes high above, conflicted uselessly. Whatever attachment she felt for the unfortunate lizard, the prospect of wealth muted it.

In the mythology of Quxot'l, the owlbear guards the gates of life and death. Newborns pass under their watchful eyes, perhaps to be taken by the spirit's envoys of illness and misfortune; perhaps to hibernate and grow into wards of unmatched potency. There is no good reason to kill an owlbear that hasn't gone sick or mad, and Dhutlo did not intend to find one that day. However little they had heard from Bellatris, and how little of the fight's posters they could read, they understood the trap for what it was. While their monstrous foes howled and lumbered, Dhutlo rushed the stands.

The bloodthirsty audience panicked and frenzied as this relentless killer of men vaulted on speartip into their midst, roaring to scatter them like ground-squirrels. Petty nobles trampled one another to escape as Dhutlo climbed and leapt to the royal boxes. Once there, Birgardian retainers encircled their employers and Bellatris too, swords drawn and shields locked. Dhutlo smirked.

"You keep me, and I fight for you," the lizard growled, "But you lay no future for me, invite me to no tradition but foolishness. When I exceed your petty vision, I am made a place to die. I am Dhutlo K'smani, the last of Clan Quxot'l, the final vessel of G'xbenmi Fen! Receive the death you wished to mete."

Dhutlo's spear found loose feet among this brawny phalanx, puncturing shoes and collapsing their line. Behind them, extravagant robes shuddered around plump Birgardian heirs. Claw and talon and tooth cut throats and smashed blades; a flurry of teal musculature hurled one and then another retainer from the boxes, to break and cry upon the stone stands below. None of them had names that mattered to Dhutlo, nor ranks nor qualities; they were the larval originators of the raiders that had harrassed Clan Quxot'l for generations, no matter how far removed from the lands of G'xbenmi. Like the settlers digging mass graves for Dhutlo's kinfolk, these caterwauling cowards bore something unimaginably cruel in their hearts. It drove them to torture owlbears, to kill each other for sport and profit, and to exploit even those as desperate and lost as Dhutlo. Nothing they could say or do now would change Dhutlo's judgment, and so they flew one by one from the boxes, until only Bellatris remained.

"Please! Please don't kill me. Oh my god you've killed them all. Now they'll kill me. They'll do even worse to you!!" the sniveling gambler bawled. Like a wounded monkey, she crawled into the box's corner among scattered hors d'ouvres and majestic tapestries spattered with blood.

Dhutlo had nothing left but rage. They could muster no words that Bellatris would understand, nothing but a low canid snarl. They grabbed their agent by the throat and, as she clawed at their thick scales for dear life, carried her back down to the pit. The owlbears wandered below, feeding idly on those poor souls that Dhutlo had tossed down. Bellatris observed the massacre in horror. Words abandoned her; only screaming remained.

As the crush of fleeing patrons subsided, the local militia filed into the stands to surround Dhutlo. The lizardfolk had an audience for their last missive.

"I am more than flesh and bone," they barked in Ke-Quxot'l, to be understood by none but the sun above, as the blood of self and other alike dripped from their mouth, "I am a will that exceeds your understanding, an eternal thread of a confounding comprehension! Just as death lives in life itself, I am embedded in the follies inherent to your triumphs. What I represent will return to haunt you again and again; you will never pry from me the essence of my power or the dignity of my being. Pray only that you never see me again, for in my heart flares your dire doom."

With that, they flung their squalling hostage to the owlbears. The militia rushed them, but they leapt into the pit too -- and vanished.

---

Days of navigating sewers did no favors for Dhutlo's wounds, so by the time they wriggled out of a culvert onto the bank of a woodsome stream, they wretched blood and phlegm, and sobbed years of tears held back. Nestled in the banal madness of Birgardia, they could wish they had somehow imagined the destruction of their clan, as though the loving reptilian faces they remembered in dream were still alive somewhere, and not rotting in the earth. Now, alone, sick, wounded and hunted, it became clear there was no going back to any of it. Dhutlo clutched the pouch of G'xbenmi soil slung around their neck, thought of B'xnamsa's sullen counsel, and whimpered.

"I am not the last," they whispered through gritted teeth, "I am the beginning."

Grinning up at the new moon, they repeated in the gloom, "I am the beginning."
