A disheveled witchmother haunts the shadows of Tessa's dreams. She knows it is herself, looking back with a crooked grin. Another self, from another place; not a mirror, but someone standing on the other side of a glass. Sometimes she sees the spirited young women she might have been, laughing and carefree; at other times, the tireless crones she is destined to become. Decades have passed since she formed the habit of knotting her smallest worries into these wondering spells, these idle *what if*'s. What would have become of me, she asks, if not for...? And what will become of me, because of it?

A long time ago, an artisan's daughter met a rat. Someone cruel had cut up the small creature so their tail and hind legs had been replaced, stitched seamlessly to the rear half of a large worm. It struggled and squealed in the grass and a foolish child chose to reach for it. The Ratworm, the Hungering Oak, the Absence at the End chose a new disciple that day, and it whisked its prize to a place of nightmare.

The disciples of the lord of fear must prove themselves against the landscape of all horror, and so Tessa found herself subjected to a cruel gauntlet, crushed alongside beings from countless times and places, even other worlds entire. The stabbing, cutting, rending and rotting ordeal consumed the many, but Tessa survived. As a reward, the Ratworm showed her the resolve, comprehension, and power that lay on the other side of terror and despair. Her mind's eye was forced open and *everything* poured in.

Now she roams the planes to curry the crop of her patron. Most disciples make tribute from whoever displeases them, but Tessa adheres to a more discerning taste. Trailing the tangle of her years are the crumpled bodies of vile malefactors who persist now only to experience horror. Rapists, slavers, kidnappers, traffickers, and the foolish lords who employ them. Sometimes they are the ones looking through the glass in her dreams, crying and begging for release. That is when she feels the chilling presence of the Hungering Oak and remembers that she too is a part of its crop.

Tessa is an unwilling acolyte of the Absence at the End. Accompanied by her undying rat -- another of the Absence's servants -- she must regularly grant the terror of the living and the bonds of the dead to her patron, or be consumed herself.
